Summary of calculation:

In order for higher education providers to be well-prepared for the imminent return of students, as well as for a general understanding of how potentially-infectious students might flow around the country at the beginning of the autumn semester, I thought it might be valuable to have even a rough estimate of the number of COVID-infected students that might be returning higher education providers.  Using data on student domiciles by HE provider and an estimate of prevalence by English region plus Wales, I have performed a simple calculation for students domiciled in English regions or in Wales.  I have now also included students domiciled in Scotland, though please note that this uses a less suitable source of prevalence information.

I can be contacted via GitHub message, or by email at jessica.enright@glasgow.ac.uk

*Update Friday, September 11: I have now updated to use more recent community infection figures, and attempt to adjust to a higher rate in young people.*

**Data sources:**

1. For student flows:  I have rounded used figures provided from HESA via Jisc on the number of students at each HE provider who are domiciled in the different English regions, or in Wales.  These numbers are from academic year 2019/2020, and exclude distance-learning students and students on industrial placements.  When it's clear what sharing of these data are allowed, I will update here.  
2. For estimated number of positive students from England and Wales:  I used figures from https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19infectionsurveypilot/11september2020#regional-analysis-of-the-number-of-people-in-england-who-had-covid-19coronaviruscovid19infectionsurveypilot/englandandwales4september2020 as the percentage of people with COVID, as well as from the section on Wales in that same page.  Many caveats attach to this, perhaps the most important are: there is a lot of uncertainty, this may not actually be a good estimate of prevalence, and the figures are not specific to the age group that most students are in (which news reports suggest has higher prevalence than the general population right now).
3. For estimated prevalence of antibodies: I used figures from https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.08.12.20173690v2.full.pdf for regional numbers, as well as the log-odds by age group to adjust for the younger age group within regions.  I do not yet have figures for Wales.
4. For estimated number of positive students from Scotland: I have not been able to find a modelled estimate of number of people in the community infected with COVID - if you have a source (particularly an authoritative government source) please contact me.  In order to include Scottish students in my estimates, I have used the lower to upper 90% confidence range from https://www.gov.scot/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-modelling-epidemic-issue-no-16/ which estimates the number of new daily infections to be between 1 and 6 per 100,000 people.  To my understanding, a central estimate isn't provided, so I have used a value in the middle of this interval.  To simplify calculations given the significant uncertainties in these estimates, I have performed calculations as if this rate of infection is stable, infected people would immediately test positive, and the length of time a person is infected is 10 days.  *I want to highlight that this is an especially rough calculation*
5. For age adjustments: I have used information from https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19infectionsurveypilot/11september2020 that gives age-trend information for the East Midlands to adjust the regional figures from other regions to reflect a higher incidence of disease in people between 17 and 24.  The way I have done this is quite crude: I have calculated the ratio between the infection rate in people between 17 and 24 in the East Midlands and the overall rate in the East Midlands (approximately 9), and have then multiplied that ratio by the overall rates in the other regions to generate estimated rates amongst people between 17 and 24 in those other regions.  I am very aware that this adds even more uncertainty to this work - if you have a source of regional age-stratified data please contact me and I will include it gratefully.

**Calculation:**
The calculation is *extremely* simple - I estimate the number of incoming infected students by multiplying the number of incoming students to a HE provider from a region by the percentage of people with COVID from that region/nation.  I have repeated this using the lower and upper confidence limits from Data Source 2.   Note that in these tables the number before the institution name is part of the institution name, and not part fo the calculation.  

- results using the central estimate are in [estimate_number_incoming_infected_from_regions_using_estimate.csv](https://github.com/magicicada/simple_epi_calculations/blob/main/basic_arriving_student_calculations/output_estimate_tables/estimate_number_incoming_infected_from_regions_using_estimate.csv)
- results using the lower confidence limit are in [estimate_number_incoming_infected_from_regions_using_lower.csv](https://github.com/magicicada/simple_epi_calculations/blob/main/basic_arriving_student_calculations/output_estimate_tables/estimate_number_incoming_infected_from_regions_using_lower.csv)
- results using the upper confidence limit are in  [estimate_number_incoming_infected_from_regions_using_upper.csv](https://github.com/magicicada/simple_epi_calculations/blob/main/basic_arriving_student_calculations/output_estimate_tables/estimate_number_incoming_infected_from_regions_using_upper.csv)
- a combination of these tables at [estimate_number_incoming_infected_from_regions_combined.csv](https://github.com/magicicada/simple_epi_calculations/blob/main/basic_arriving_student_calculations/output_estimate_tables/estimate_number_incoming_infected_from_regions_combined.csv)

As described above, I've attempted to adjust the infection figures using data on the infection levels amongst younger people in the East Midlands.  These tables are also available in the output directory, in particular 
- the combined table that incorporates calculations from central, lower, and upper values is in [estimate_number_incoming_infected_from_regions_age_adjusted_combined.csv](https://github.com/magicicada/simple_epi_calculations/blob/main/basic_arriving_student_calculations/output_estimate_tables/estimate_number_incoming_infected_from_regions_age_adjusted_combined.csv)


I have now completed a similar calculation using the same piece of code (invoked using the script run_script_estimates) based on the antibody prevalence estimates in https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.08.12.20173690v2.full.pdf, both for the overall population in each region and for that prevalence adjusted upwards by the log-odds ratio given for people in the 18-24 age group (note that this simple multiplication has also been applied to the upper and lower confidence values).  The output tables are similarly in https://github.com/magicicada/simple_epi_calculations/blob/main/basic_arriving_student_calculations/output_estimate_tables/

**Major Limitations:**

1. The flows of students are from a previous non-pandemic year, and may not accurately reflect the movements of students this year
2. The use of data on modelled percentage of people in a region testing positive as prevalence may be unsuitable for a number of reasons: the measure may just not be suitable for prevalence, it is not specific to the age group, there is significant uncertainty, is at a broad geographic scale, etc. 
3. The calculation is very simple.  There will be a better way to do this that captures uncertainty more robustly.
4. I’ve not included any consideration of symptomatic infections moving or not moving differently to others.  I’ve not explicitly considered exposed vs asymptomatic vs infectious groups, etc.  
5. The antibody prevalences are from a moment in time, and I have not modelled any further accumulation nor any decay of antibodies. 
6. I have only included students domiciled in English regions, or in Wales or Scotland.

I want to especially repeat one of those: recently, news reports have suggested that prevalence is highest in the UK in young people.  I have used estimates from the general population.

**Next steps:**

I am planning to expand this work in several ways, including incorporating international students and UK students not from England, Wales, or Scotland, incorporating information at a finer geographic scale or including better prevalence estimates when they become available, etc.  
